.TH "syndaemon" "1" "0.14.2" "" ""
.SH "NAME"
.LP
syndaemon \- a program that monitors keyboard activity and disables
the touchpad when the keyboard is being used.
.SH "SYNTAX"
.LP
syndaemon [\fI\-i idle\-time\fP] [\fI\-d\fP] [\fI\-p pid\-file\fP]
[\fI\-t\fP] [\fI\-k\fP]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.LP
Disabling the touchpad while typing avoids unwanted movements of the
pointer that could lead to giving focus to the wrong window.
.
This program needs SHMConfig "on" in your XOrg/XFree86 Synaptics
Touchpad configuration.
.SH "OPTIONS"
.LP
.TP
\fB\-i\fR <\fIidle\-time\fP>
How many seconds to wait after the last key press before enabling the
touchpad.
.
(default is 2.0s). 
.LP
.TP
\fB\-d\fP
Start as a daemon, ie in the background.
.LP
.TP
\fB\-p\fR <\fIpid\-file\fP>
Create a pid file with the specified filename.
.
A pid file will only be created if the program is started in daemon
mode.
.LP
.TP
\fB\-t\fP
Only disable tapping and scrolling, not mouse movements, in response
to keyboard activity.
.LP
.TP
\fB\-k\fP
Ignore modifier keys when monitoring keyboard activity.
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.LP
.TP
\fBDISPLAY\fP
Specifies the X server to contact.
.SH "CAVEATS"
.LP
It doesn't make much sense to connect to a remote X server, because
the daemon will then monitor the remote server for keyboard activity,
but will disable the touchpad on the local machine.
.SH "AUTHORS"
.LP
Peter Osterlund <petero2@telia.com>.
.TP
This man page was written by Mattia Dongili <malattia@debian.org>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.LP
synclient(1), synaptics(5)
